---
parent: Class slides
nav_order: "D"
---

## P1D2: Visualization and the Tidyverse

> Above all else, show the data
> [Tufte](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Edward_Tufte)

### Visualization facilitates every step of data science

> "The simple graph has brought more information to the data analyst's mind than any other device."
> John Tukey

> "The greatest value of a picture is when it forces us to notice what we never expected to see."
> John Tukey

### The grammar of graphics

- [Introduction to the grammar](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=uiTc55clwuA)

## R for data science

> A powerful programming language is more than just a means for instructing a computer to perform tasks. The language also serves as a framework within which we organize our ideas about processes. Thus, when we describe a language, we should pay particular attention to the means that the language provides for combining simple ideas to form more complex ideas. Every powerful language has three mechanisms for accomplishing this:
> 1. primitive expressions, which represent the simplest entities the language is concerned with,
> 2. means of combination, by which compound elements are built from simpler ones, and
> 3. means of abstraction, by which compound elements can be named and manipulated as units.
> Harold Abelson, [Structure and Interpretation of Computer Programs](https://www.goodreads.com/work/quotes/871745-structure-and-interpretation-of-computer-programs)

### The pipe `%>%`

You can read it as a series of imperative statements: group, then summarize, then filter. As the reading suggests, a good way to pronounce %>% when reading code is __"then"__.

- Behind the scenes, x %>% f(y) turns into f(x, y), and x %>% f(y) %>% g(z) turns into g(f(x, y), z) and so on. 
- You can use the pipe to rewrite multiple operations so that you can read left-to-right, top-to-bottom. 
- We'll use piping frequently from now on because it considerably improves the readability of code.

You can read more about [pipes in R for Data Science](https://r4ds.had.co.nz/pipes.html).

_Which mechanism is the `%>%`?_

### dplyr

_Which mechanism is the `library(dplyr)`?_


__The standard table mungers__

> - `filter()`  - filter your data to a smaller set of important rows.
> - `arrange()` - Organize the row order of my data
> - `select()`  - select specific columns to keep or remove 
> - `mutate()`  - add new mutated (changed) variables as columns to my data.

__The new table creators__

> - `group_by()`  - divide your data into groups. Often used with `summarise()`
> - `summarise()` - build summaries of the columns specified

__Practice reading code__

With your table, write this code out in an English paragraph.

```r 
delays <- flights %>% 
  group_by(dest) %>% 
  summarise(
    count = n(),
    dist = mean(distance, na.rm = TRUE),
    delay = mean(arr_delay, na.rm = TRUE)
  ) %>% 
  filter(count > 20, dest != "HNL")
```

## Practice using dplyr

Use `filter()`, `arrange()`, `select()`, `mutate()`, `group_by()`, and `summarise()`. With `library(tidyverse)` tackle the following challenges.

> 1. Arrange the `iris` data by `Sepal.Length` and display the first six rows.
> 2. Select the `Species` and `Petal.Width` columns and put them into a new data set called `testdat`.
> 3. Create a new table that has the mean for each variable by Species.
> 4. Read about the `?summarise_all()` function and get a new table with the means and standard deviations for each Species.
> 5. Look at the examples in the `summarise_all()` help file and see if you can find other use cases for the `summarise_` or `mutate_` functions.


### The grammar of ggplot2

- [Introduction to ggplot2](https://youtu.be/PiY9hwOkL8U)

### ggplot2 and iris data

Use the `iris` data to show a faceted visualization with a `color`, `shape`, and `size` layer or geometry.

## Debugging code and asking questions

### What is wrong?

_After the first line, look at each command and find the error._

```r
library(tidyverse)

ggplot(dota = mpg) + 
  geom_point(mapping = aes(x = displ, y = hwy))

fliter(mpg, cyl = 8)
filter(diamond, carat > 3)
data.frame(1:10,10:1,)
```

### What is R telling me?

Run each line above, and let's discuss what the error tells us.

### Asking questions!

> There are two ways to write error-free programs; only the third one works.
> [Alan Perlis](https://www.r-bloggers.com/2016/06/common-r-programming-errors-faced-by-beginners/)

_We need to find the balance between learning and wasting time.  Learning when to ask questions is an essential tool in this process.  If you ask someone to solve your problem too early, you don't understand.  However, if you spend hours spinning your wheels, it may be worse._
